In this lesson we will learn about CSSA sprites now instead of trying to explain what a CSSA Sprite
is with only words.
Let's jump straight into a visual demonstration in front of you is an example page.
And we see three new icons or buttons when we hover over one of the buttons.
It lights up with a unique color.
So this first icon is a house and it represents the home of the website or app.
This second icon is supposed to be a user or person which would represent a profile page.
And this third icon is supposed to be a gear with represents a Settings screen.
Now these icons were hand-drawn in about two minutes by yours truly.
So feel free to mock them.
They are for educational purposes only.
But what's important is that this menu of icons is an example of CSSA sprites.
So what does that phrase mean.
Why are these sprites.
What is a sprite.
It's all related to the way that the image files for these icons are stored.
So on my desktop there is a PMG Geographic file named sprites.
And when I double click it it pops up and you can see that this is the graphic file that contains all
of the icons.
The phrase sprites simply means that we're storing all of the icons in one image file instead of having
six different image files for the six different graphic States.
You may be wondering why in the world would we do this.
Why wouldn't we just include six different image files for the six different icons.
The answer is speed.
Page load times every time you visit a Web site your web browser has to connect to a certain server
and download all of the files associated with the Web site.
So there are graphic files CSSA files javascript files and for each file your browser has to make in
HTP request which takes time.
So by using CSSA sprites we're reducing the number of HTP requests which means we're reducing the time
it takes to load our web pages and in the modern era speed is everything.
Users don't want to wait.
So if there's something we can do to make our pages faster we should do it.
So at this point we know what a sprite is.
We know why we use sprites.
The only thing we're missing is the how.
How do we create sprites.
I'm going to hop over to another tab and we can see that there are no icons.
There is just a menu of links.
Home profile and settings.
So for the remainder of this lesson we are going to work together to rewrite the code to turn this text
based menu into an icon based menu that uses CSSA sprites.
Let's get started.
I will begin by moving the sprites dot P.N. Geographic file to live within the same folder as our Web
site.
Here is indexed page here.
We have an images folder to stay organized so I'm going to drag the sprites file into the images folder
with that in place.
Let's review the HTL mail that is currently creating this text based menu nothing more than a nav element
using an unordered list in the list item structure and we see that the parent Gnab element has a class
of UI menu.
So over in our CSSA file I've included a bit of basic code that you should be familiar with.
All we're doing is floating the list items to the left.
We are removing the default bullets that list items receive and we've added a bit of margin right so
that there is space between the three links.
So let's write a bit of new CSSA code that targets the actual anchor or elements.
UI menu a.
So we want the links to be block level so display block and now we can specify a width and height.
Now I created these graphics myself so I know that each icon is 50 pixels wide by 50 pixels tall so
I will give the link elements a width of 50 pixels a height of 50 pixels.
And here is the beginning of the heart and soul of CSSA sprites.
It's all centered around a background image so I will point the browser towards this pink file that
we keep referencing.
Background image you are l go into the images folder and grab the sprites stop PLG file.
So if I save and refresh we see two problems.
Number one we have both text and icons which looks awful.
And number two all three links are using the home icon.
So first let's fix the text issue.
We want to hide the text.
You will add a new declaration text indent negative nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine pixels so
that hides the text.
So now the only problem is all three links are using the home icon.
So we need to send different CSSA instructions to each link to have it show the appropriate part of
our graphic file so we need a way to distinguish between the three links.
So in our TNL code I'm going to add unique classes to each list item.
So the first will have a class of UI home.
I'll give the second a class of UI profile.
And the third a class of UI settings.
Now we can write CSSA that targets or selects these unique class names.
Now the whole link is already showing the correct part of the background image.
So let's work on the UI profiled class in our CSSA file create a new rule UI profile and select the
A or linked element within that.
So we're going to use the background position property.
Now if we look at our graphic file we are interested in displaying this portion of it.
This 50 by 50 pixel Square.
So in order to display this portion we can use the background position property and specify that we
want to move down 50 pixels from the top.
Now in an earlier lesson we learned about keywords like top left or bottom right.
But we can also specify two numerical values.
So the first controls the horizontal position and the second value controls the vertical.
Now we know that we want to move 50 pixels down vertically.
If I include a positive value of 50 pixels the web browser will push the background image down so we
will actually see this 50 pixels Square or in other words we'll see nothing.
Now I can illustrate this by making sure that I add the background repeat no repeat property to the
universal link rule.
So if I save and refresh we see that the second link is now empty.
So obviously we don't want to move 50 pixels in this direction.
We want to move 50 pixels in this direction so I can simply make this a negative value negative 50 pixels
vertically.
If we were fresh you can see we're in business.
Next let's create the styles for the third link which is supposed to be the settings gear will create
a new rule UI settings.
Select the element background position.
So now we know that we want to move down a hundred pixels from the top to select this area.
So a background position will be 0 and negative 100 pixels.
There you have it.
Next lets work towards adding the hover effects.
So in our graphic file we can see that to the right of each icon is the version that uses unique colors
and we want that version to display when we hover over one of the particular icons.
So let's begin by writing the CSSA for the home hover icon or create a new rule UI home select the element
.
Use a pseudo selector of hover background position negative 50 pixels horizontal and zero pixels vertically
If we refresh and hover over the home icon we see the hunter effect.
Next let's apply that same logic to the profile and settings icons.
So I'm going to adjust this code to sit on a single line just to stay organized.
I can simply copy this line for the profile style paste it and on the duplicate add a pseudo selector
of hover.
And because we copied and pasted this line the vertical positioning is already correct for the profile
icon.
We just need to adjust the horizontal positioning.
Or in other words this style is already selecting this portion of the background image.
So let's simply push it's horizontal positioning 50 pixels to the right so I'll adjust this first value
to negative 50 pixels.
So if I save and refresh and hover over the user or profile icon we see that the hover effect is in
place.
And finally let's create the hover effect rule for the settings icon.
So let's modify this to sit on a single line.
Let's duplicate it via copy and paste adjust the duplicate.
To use the hover pseudo selector on the element and adjust the horizontal positioning of the background
to negative 50 pixels.
If we save and refresh the gear is also using the hover effect which means our CSSA sprites menu is
now complete.
That will bring this lesson to a close.
But first here's a quick review.
We use sprites for small icon based graphics on our web pages because by combining these graphics into
one file it makes our pages load faster.
We learned that the CSSA recipe for sprites is nothing more than assigning a background image and then
using a bit of trickery with the background position property.
So this way we can display different portions of the image for different elements on the page.
And finally I want to talk a bit about the actual graphic file that we saw referenced throughout the
lesson.
I used Photoshop to combine and align the icons perfectly in a 50 pixel grid.
If you don't have access to Adobe Photoshop that's not a problem.
You can use the image editing software named gimp it's freely available for all major platforms and
obviously you do not need to use a 50 pixel grid.
However you want to align your different icons so that you can easily write CSSA to display the correct
portions is fine.
If you need to include icons in your web pages I encourage you to experiment with the sprites method
.
Have fun and I will see you in the next lesson.